SIMD-0387: BLS Pubkey Management in Vote Account. (#387)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/0387-bls-pubkey-management-in-vote-account.md

It also describes in detail the data structure changes needed.

## Motivation

The Alpenglow SIMD (326) described the new consensus protocol which will be
launched on Solana. The protocol requires efficient and safe aggregation of
validator votes to succinctly prove certain state transitions can safely happen
(for example, 60% of the validators voted to skip a slot). The ed25519
signatures we currently use are not the best fit for this purpose, so instead
we will be using the Boneh–Lynn–Shacham (BLS) aggregate signature scheme to
sign Alpenglow votes.

However, the BLS public key is entirely different from an ed25519 public key
(as BLS operates over a different elliptic curve), so we can’t naively reuse
the current ed25519 public keys in vote accounts either. We have to add a BLS
public key into each vote account and make that a requirement a little before
Alpenglow launches per [SIMD 357](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/357).

## New Terminology

- **BLS public key**: The public key used in BLS signatures. Its size is 48
bytes in vote accounts, the field name is bls_pubkey_compressed (we will

> uncompress it later into 96 bytes, but that’s internal implementation details).

Reviewer: Yeah, but I'd make sure you specify that it's in a compressed form.

## Detailed Design

BLS keypairs can be generated randomly like ed25519 keypairs. But to save the
users some trouble on keypair management, we chose to derive their BLS keypair
used in Alpenglow votes based on their ed25519 vote keypair. In other words,
with an existing ed25519 vote keypair, the users can safely regenerate the
associated BLS keypair on demand.

### User Operations Support

Since a user’s BLS keypair always changes with the vote authority keypair, we
list three different scenarios below.

1. Creating a new vote account

After VoteStateV4 (SIMD 185) is enabled everywhere, when users use

> create-vote-account to create a new vote account, the correct BLS public key

Author: Mostly trying to describe vote program behavior, you have a good point I should add CLI section as well

key rotation happens at the same time when a new vote authority switch happens.

3. Updating missing BLS public key on existing vote account

This is a temporary work-around before all existing staked vote accounts have
proper BLS public keys specified. We will add update-bls-pubkey command so it
will use the given vote authority keypair to generate and update the BLS public
key in the vote account. When everyone has a proper BLS public key in their
vote accounts this command can be removed.

### New instructions to vote programs

In the following instructions, there is a proof_of_possession field associated
with the new BLS public key. Since we need to verify the caller really holds
the BLS public key claimed, the caller needs to prove possession of the BLS
keypair to the vote program by signing the BLS public key with the
corresponding BLS keypair. Then the vote program can do a syscall to actually
verify the validity of BLS public key. If the verification fails, the
transaction will fail.

Since BLS verification is expensive (in the order of ~1 millisecond), these
operations changing BLS public key will need to have correct CU specified to

> succeed (actual numbers to be measured and published later).

Reviewer 2: To be consistent, using [current conversion rate](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/cost-model/src/block_cost_limits.rs#L8) of 30cu per 1 micro-sec, 1.15ms converts to 34,500 CU. It exceeds [3,000 MAX builtin allocation CUs](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/program-runtime/src/execution_budget.rs#L47). (As a reference, currently all vote instructions have 2,100 CUs). So the v2 vote needs to be excluded from "builtin " list. Also, to echo @buffalojoec 's point, are all instructions do same BLS verifications therefore cost same CUs, or they can be different?

> succeed (actual numbers to be measured and published later).

Author: Thanks! The new instructions/new variants all do the same BLS verification and they should cost the same amount of CUs.

> succeed (actual numbers to be measured and published later).

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think so — excluding the Vote program from the built-in list would affect consensus. It’d be great if you could include what @jstarry mentioned in the section where the Vote program is defined.

> succeed (actual numbers to be measured and published later).

Author: Added, see if what I added make sense?

We will be adding the following three instructions:

```rust
pub enum VoteInstruction {
  InitializeAccountWithBLS(VoteInitWithBLS),
  AuthorizeCheckedWithBLS(VoteAuthorizeWithBLS),
  AuthorizeCheckedWithSeedAndBLS(VoteAuthorizeCheckedWithSeedAndBLS)
}
```

- InitializeAccountWithBLS(VoteInitWithBLS)

The main difference between this and InitializeAccount is that VoteInitWithBLS

> will contain a new field in addition to the ones in VoteInit:

Author: That would be awesome. Let me know what you prefer.

```rust

/// Size of a BLS signature in a compressed point representation
pub const BLS_SIGNATURE_COMPRESSED_SIZE: usize = 96;

pub struct VoteInitWithBLS {
    pub node_pubkey: Pubkey,
    pub authorized_voter: Pubkey,
    pub authorized_withdrawer: Pubkey,
    pub commission: u8,
    pub bls_pubkey_compressed: [u8; BLS_PUBLIC_KEY_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
    // signing bls_pubkey with bls keypair
    pub proof_of_possession: pub  [u8; BLS_SIGNATURE_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
}
```

In addition to the original checks, it also checks that proof of possession is
correctly signed.

- AuthorizeCheckedWithBLS(VoteAuthorizeWithBLS)

Changing the vote authority public key and BLS public key for existing vote
account without using seed: (we can also use it to add BLS public key to

> existing vote account, just check vote authority public key didn’t change)

Author: I actually only care about touching vote authority pubkey, for other changes I'm fine to have old instructions go through, but it's going to be confusing to user, so maybe better to move everything to new instructions.

If capturing the new variant in authorization_type does the work, then I'm fine with it. All I care is:
- Must specify BLS pubkey when creating new account
- Whenever vote authority pubkey changes, BLS pubkey must change with it

> existing vote account, just check vote authority public key didn’t change)

Author: Does the current change look correct then?

vote-authorize-voter-checked to update vote authority keypair, the correct BLS
public key will be automatically updated in the vote account. The BLS public
key rotation happens at the same time when a new vote authority switch happens.

3. Updating missing BLS public key on existing vote account

This is a temporary work-around before all existing staked vote accounts have
proper BLS public keys specified. We will add update-bls-pubkey command so it
will use the given vote authority keypair to generate and update the BLS public
key in the vote account. When everyone has a proper BLS public key in their
vote accounts this command can be removed.

### New instructions to vote programs

In the following instructions, there is a proof_of_possession field associated
with the new BLS public key. Since we need to verify the caller really holds
the BLS public key claimed, the caller needs to prove possession of the BLS
keypair to the vote program by signing the BLS public key with the
corresponding BLS keypair. Then the vote program can do a syscall to actually
verify the validity of BLS public key. If the verification fails, the

> transaction will fail.

Reviewer 3: There's no precedent for native programs making syscalls that I know of. We should probably add a BLS program which can verify the BLS key proof of possession. Then, the vote program can invoke the BLS program to verify the proof.

Author: Added that to "Alternatives Considered".

keypair is used).

2. Changing vote authority keypair on existing vote account

When users update the vote authority keypair, the correct BLS public key will
be automatically updated in the vote account. The BLS public key rotation
happens at the same time when a new vote authority switch happens.

3. Updating missing BLS public key on existing vote account

This is a temporary work-around before all existing staked vote accounts have
proper BLS public keys specified. We will add `update-bls-pubkey` command so it
will use the given vote authority keypair to generate and update the BLS public
key in the vote account. When everyone has a proper BLS public key in their
vote accounts this command can be removed.

### Changes to vote program

Whenever a new BLS public key is being updated in the vote account, we need
to perform BLS verification on its validity, see "Security Considerations"
for details. We plan to implement this by calling BLS library from the vote
program, see "Alternatives Considered" for comparison with other solutions.

Since BLS verification is expensive (in the order of ~1 millisecond), these

> operations changing BLS public key will need to have correct CU specified to

Reviewer 3: Can you clarify that CU's must be consumed right before doing BLS signature verification? And cc @tao-stones for discussing the CU number given time for BLS verification.

Author: Yup, already asked Tao and he estimate 1.15ms running time translates to 34,500 CU. Updated that in the PR.

succeed (actual numbers to be measured and added to this PR).

#### Disallow change of vote authority by old instructions

After the feature gate associated with this SIMD is activated, the previous
instructions will be disallowed to change vote authority, they will result
in transaction errors. These include:

```rust
// Will be totally forbidden, use InitializeAccountV2
InitializeAccount(VoteInit),
// Forbidden when VoteAuthorize is VoteAuthorize::Voter
AuthorizeChecked(VoteAuthorize),
// Forbidden when authorization_type is VoteAuthorize::Voter

> AuthorizeCheckedWithSeed(VoteAuthorizeWithSeedArgs),

Author: Changed, how does this look?

> AuthorizeCheckedWithSeed(VoteAuthorizeWithSeedArgs),

Author: I think forbid `VoteAuthorize::Voter` when the BLS pubkey is already configured is probably enough, this guarantees once you have a BLS pubkey it is always valid. For those people rejecting to write BLS pubkey to their vote account, allowing them to do `VoteAuthorize::Voter` is not end of the world, we will kick them out eventually per SIMD 357.

validator votes to succinctly prove certain state transitions can safely happen
(for example, 60% of the validators voted to skip a slot). The ed25519
signatures we currently use are not the best fit for this purpose, so instead
we will be using the Boneh–Lynn–Shacham (BLS) aggregate signature scheme to
sign Alpenglow votes.

However, the BLS public key is entirely different from an ed25519 public key
(as BLS operates over a different elliptic curve), so we can’t naively reuse
the current ed25519 public keys in vote accounts either. We have to add a BLS
public key into each vote account and make that a requirement a little before
Alpenglow launches.

## Dependencies

- Alpenglow is specified in [SIMD 326](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/326)

- VoteStateV4 is specified in [SIMD 185](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/185)
and it adds an optional BLS public key field

- Requiring BLS public key for Alpenglow is specified in [SIMD 357](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/357)

## New Terminology

- **BLS public key**: The public key used in BLS signatures. It will be

> compressed and stored as a 48 bytes vector in vote account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compressed and stored as a 48-byte array in vote account.
```

Whenever a new BLS public key is being updated in the vote account, we need
to perform BLS verification on its validity, see "Security Considerations"
for details. We plan to implement this by calling BLS library from the vote
program, see "Alternatives Considered" for comparison with other solutions.

Since BLS verification is expensive (around 1.15ms), these operations changing
BLS public key will need to have consume 34,500 CU right before BLS signature
verification happens.

Currently the vote program is still using the builtin CU, and each instruction
consumes 3,000 CU. We propose to completely remove the vote program from using
the built in CU. Because simple vote transactions do not use the code path
where the CU limit matters, and there are very few other transactions executed
in the vote program. We can make those transactions consume correct CU based
on the amount of CPU they would consume.

#### Disallow change of vote authority by old instructions

After the feature gate associated with this SIMD is activated, the previous
instructions will be disallowed to change vote authority after off-chain tools
are upgraded, they will result in transaction errors. These include:

> ```rust

Reviewer: Up to you nit: this could probably just be a bullet list in markdown and not a code snippet, but it's pedantic, so your call!

Author: Done.

> // Will be forbidden after off-chain tools are upgraded, use InitializeAccountV2

Reviewer: I wonder if we can just save the deprecation of this instruction for another SIMD? As per [SIMD-0357](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/357), vote accounts with an invalid BLS pubkey won't be included in Votor, so we already have an incentive for people to use any of these new methods to set the BLS key.

In my opinion, we can just add a nice, simple SIMD to deprecate/remove this instruction later.

Author: Removed.

pub const BLS_PUBLIC_KEY_COMPRESSED_SIZE: usize = 48;
pub const BLS_SIGNATURE_COMPRESSED_SIZE: usize = 96;

pub struct VoteInitV2 {
  pub note_pubkey: Pubkey,
  pub authorized_voter: Pubkey,
  pub authorized_voter_bls_pubkey: [u8; BLS_PUBLIC_KEY_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
  pub authorized_voter_bls_proof_of_possession: [u8; BLS_SIGNATURE_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
  pub authorized_withdrawer: Pubkey,
  pub inflation_rewards_commission_bps: u16,
  pub inflation_rewards_collector: Pubkey,
  pub block_revenue_commission_bps: u16,
  pub block_revenue_collector: Pubkey,
}
```

Upon receiving the transaction, the vote program will perform a BLS
verification on submitted BLS public key and associated proof of possession.
The transaction will fail if the verification failed. Otherwise the new vote
account is created with given parameters.

#### Add new variant of VoteAuthorize

```rust
pub struct VoterWithBLSArgs {
    bls_pub_key: [u8; BLS_PUBLIC_KEY_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
    bls_proof_of_possession: [u8; BLS_SIGNATURE_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
}

pub enum VoteAuthorize {
    Voter,
    Withdrawer,
    VoterWithBLS(VoterWithBLSArgs),
}
```

We only allow the new variant in AuthorizeCheck instruction. Calling the new

> variant in any other instruction will fail. Upon receiving the AuthorizeCheck

Author: Okay, this is from the wrong impression that we plan to not use Authorize any more, removed.

---
simd: '0387'
title: BLS Pubkey management in vote account
authors:
  - Sam Kim (Anza)
  - Quentin Kniep (Anza)
  - Wen Xu (Anza)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Review
created: 2025-10-27
feature: (fill in with feature key and github tracking issues once accepted)
---

## Summary

This proposal specifies in detail how a BLS public key can be generated by
users via updated existing tools and how they can put the generated BLS public

> keys into their vote accounts for voting in Alpenglow.

Reviewer 4: We should mention a critical piece of the proposal here, which is how the network verifies PoP

It also describes in detail the data structure changes needed.

## Motivation

The Alpenglow SIMD (326) described the new consensus protocol which will be
launched on Solana. The protocol requires efficient and safe aggregation of
validator votes to succinctly prove certain state transitions can safely happen
(for example, 60% of the validators voted to skip a slot). The ed25519
signatures we currently use are not the best fit for this purpose, so instead
we will be using the Boneh–Lynn–Shacham (BLS) aggregate signature scheme to
sign Alpenglow votes.

However, the BLS public key is entirely different from an ed25519 public key
(as BLS operates over a different elliptic curve), so we can’t naively reuse
the current ed25519 public keys in vote accounts either. We have to add a BLS
public key into each vote account and make that a requirement a little before

> Alpenglow launches.

Reviewer 4: wordsmith: "Each validator must add a BLS public into their vote account before the network enables Alpenglow in order to vote"

## Dependencies

- Alpenglow is specified in [SIMD 326](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/326)

- VoteStateV4 is specified in [SIMD 185](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/185)
and it adds an optional BLS public key field

- Requiring BLS public key for Alpenglow is specified in [SIMD 357](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/357)

## New Terminology

- **BLS public key**: The public key used in BLS signatures. It will be
compressed and stored as a 48-byte array in vote account.

## Detailed Design

BLS keypairs can be generated randomly like ed25519 keypairs. But to save the
users some trouble on keypair management, we chose to derive their BLS keypair
used in Alpenglow votes based on their ed25519 vote keypair. In other words,
with an existing ed25519 vote keypair, the users can safely regenerate the

> associated BLS keypair on demand.

Author: It's actually possible, and we have no way to verify the two are related. So users can do:
1. Generate a random BLS keypair and put that in vote account
2. Change code to use the given BLS keypair instead of using the vote authority keypair

The protocol works as long as the users use the same BLS keypair in step 1 and 2.

The long term plan after Alpenglow migration is that we should get rid of vote authority keypair and have BLS keypair only, then users supply BLS keypair to validator execution.

Clarified it a bit.

> associated BLS keypair on demand.

Author: Yeah, I originally didn't want to put it in the SIMD, but then the users may have the question: "Do I need to generate a BLS keypair and put it in my wallet?" So this is user visible.

We mainly chose current route so during the migration epoch, we don't need to tell users: "Please explicitly load both keypairs in your wallet, you will need the BLS keypair suddenly in the middle".

After Alpenglow launches it matters less, we can relax this association and remove vote authority ed25519 keypair completely.

Changed.

  pub authorized_voter_bls_proof_of_possession: [u8; BLS_SIGNATURE_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
  pub authorized_withdrawer: Pubkey,
  pub inflation_rewards_commission_bps: u16,
  pub inflation_rewards_collector: Pubkey,
  pub block_revenue_commission_bps: u16,
  pub block_revenue_collector: Pubkey,
}
```

Upon receiving the transaction, the vote program will perform a BLS
verification on submitted BLS public key and associated proof of possession.
The transaction will fail if the verification failed. Otherwise the new vote
account is created with given parameters.

#### Add new variant of VoteAuthorize

```rust
pub struct VoterWithBLSArgs {
    bls_pub_key: [u8; BLS_PUBLIC_KEY_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
    bls_proof_of_possession: [u8; BLS_SIGNATURE_COMPRESSED_SIZE],
}

pub enum VoteAuthorize {
    Voter,
    Withdrawer,
    VoterWithBLS(VoterWithBLSArgs),
}
```

Upon receiving the transaction, if the parameter is of the new variant, the
vote program will perform a BLS verification on submitted BLS public key and
associated proof of possession. The transaction will fail if the verification
failed. Otherwise the vote authority change will be recorded in vote account.

## Impact

> When starting a validator, the users are supposed to provide all ed25519

Reviewer 4: `s/the users/ operators/`

Author: Done.
